Okay.
Thank you, everyone, for being here.
Hi, everyone.
Thanks for joining me today.
My name is Stan.
He's less signu, but call me Stan.
I'm also called signer on the internet.
So it's pronounced like this, but of course, nobody besides language
nerd know how to pronounce those letters.
So you can simply remember, see me, hey, and you correctly pronounce
it.
But call me Stan.
It's easier and nobody cares.
My internet handle or my AT protocol, a nickname is signer.
fr and I'm signer everywhere else.
And there are a lot of, you know, key facts about me,
but honestly, everything that you will see on this slide doesn't
matter because I'm French and this is the main thing that
you will have to remember about me here.
And that is also why I won't do so many, that
much of eye contact because I will have to follow my notes
because it's a very dense presentation.
I will try to, you know, respect the timing.
And also I have a weird accent that you, you may have
noticed that.
And I will be talking a lot about French from France, which
is FRFR for real, for real.
And that is, that is key because I'm sorry for all
the Quebecois and also the Belgium and Switzerland guys,
and also all the people from Africa that speak French.
There are a lot of people over there.
I will not focus about that because I had to crunch it
down to only 25, 30, 35 minutes.
So let's go on.
I'm here because I'm the main volunteer translators of
Blue Skies UI in French.
Everything on the website, besides user generated content, of course, is translated
in French.
And that's partly because of my volunteer job that I do
early in the morning before taking my croissant with a, yeah,
breakfast and my favorite Boulanger.
And that is not a joke.
I actually do that.
So maybe you are thinking right now that what I do is
practically this.
Taking Blue Skies source code, translating things, and ta-da, Blue
Skies is available in French.
Surprise, that's not that simple.
I encountered a lot of little problems, a bunch of anecdotes
that can actually help you design better products, I think.
And simply, if you are just curious about it, learn a little
bit of, you know, behind the curtain things about how to actually
internationalize, localize such a complex app.
So here is our roadmap for today.
And as you can see, I've used some examples of real
cases that I've faced besides the joke of the beginning.
And each time we'll get back to this roadmap, you will
learn something that will replace those cases.
So let's start with the first one.
It's not poster.
It's poster.
The verb.
So here is the UI of Blue Sky with an equivalent of
the example.
com situation, a JerryPost.
And as you may notice on the top of the screen, there
is a header that says, "Post," because what just us have
seen is a post.
Signage is not really, it's sometimes redundant, but it's
useful to know.
And let's say that this very funny post inspired me to
write another funny post.
So I boot up the, open up the post composer and look
here on the top right corner, a post button.
Of course, in this context, you know that it's not some
header.
It's just a button.
And post is written here because we write infinitive form of
verbs on top of buttons.
Or maybe it's imperative form.
Yeah, you said post.
Yeah, make it obvious.
Whatever.
So to recap, in English, US, you have those two posts, but
it doesn't actually mean the same.
They are broadly the same, but they are not the same.
One is a verb, one is a noun.
Let's say that I want to translate that in French.
Now, I think that you are coming to what I'm going
to.
So I want to change this to "poster," which is the
French for "to post." So I'll open up "crowding,"
and I can see this.
Of course, it's a very simplified version.
Oh, there is "post." So I will change it to "poste."
When I get back, oh, perfect, "poste." But you may have
did this yourself.
Here is "poste," and that doesn't make any sense.
So something is broken, and to explain why this is happening, I
have to talk about internationalization.
By the way, did you ever notice that there were 18 characters?
That's why we write it like that everywhere.
Actually, a lot of people don't know that, and it's
a weird way of doing an acronym, but yeah.
There are two main ways of organizing strings, translations.
In a project, you can either decide a reference language.
Not surprisingly, most of the time it's English.
And every word that is shown to the users is directly written
in that reference language in the source code.
And then internationalization libraries, and check out if there are any
translations for those words in a translation file, and swap those.
But you have also another strategy that is the hierarchical ident
ifiers.
You got it.
And basically, you treat all the words shown on the screen as
external data that you reference using symbolic keys like those.
The benefit of this approach is that those identifiers are clear
for translators, because we have context.
And you can edit the text shown to users even in your
own language.
So if you want to change what we also call microcop
y, the word that you use for the users, even in English,
you can do so without changing the source code, which is something
kind of nice.
And it's also cool because in a thinking way, English is
just another language.
It's not the reference language.
So that's a cool way to do that.
But blue sky shows the former.
And honestly, I do understand that.
Because let's be honest, most English speaking developers just want to
iterate very quickly.
And they just slap the translation after the fact.
And so yeah, this shows the first strategy.
And it's very common.
And honestly, it works.
So and this is one of the two slides with code on
it.
We just slap the trends tag into that.
And like lives, these trends tags matters a lot.
It's a way for the international library to do its job
and go fetch your actual translation for that string here post.
So now that you know a little bit more about internationalization,
how can we fix this problem?
Well, actually, it's quite simple.
And even if we have to do something on the source code,
of course, we just have to add context tags, basically attaching some
context to each of these strings.
The first one is basically, you know, standard unknown.
The second one, an action verb.
And in the code, the second side, we simply have to add
context equal description, because post is a description of the thing, not
an action.
As soon as we do that, the localization catalog updates, and
we have two separate entries.
And I can simply translate the second one and not the first
one.
And ta-da, everything is translated correctly.
Success.
So the thing that I want you to remember for this first
example is context is everything.
Something that we know, but it's important to, you know, to
say again.
And you have to be ready to hear the demands of your
translators to add context tags if you use the first strategy.
If you use the second, normally, you shouldn't have to do
that, because it's already in the identifier.
And to their credits, the Blue Sky team always accepted our pull
request very quickly to add context tags.
So that's awesome.
And I thank them for that.
So context is everything.
Let's get to the next one, "abonner" with those weird
points.
And you will understand why they are there.
They are weird dots.
But first, let me tell you a story that starts with a
GitHub issue.
This GitHub issue created by Fenarin Arsat is quite
simple.
Make the French translation gender neutral.
And as I said, the current French translation does not follow the
current recommendation for non-sexist and more inclusive French forms.
To explain what he's talking about, I have to explain a
few things about French.
So please bear with me while I will try to offer you
some French 101 lesson.
I know you understand why it may take a long time.
This is a hat.
In French, we would translate it as "un chapeau".
This is a tulip.
In French, "une tulip", "une tulip".
Yeah.
Did you notice, "une tulip", it's a feminine word.
In French, everything is gendered.
We chose a gender for everything.
And there is an aesthetics here, but honestly, nearly everything has gender
ed has gendered in French, even for brand new words.
So some examples of gendered things, so you understand the mess
that it can become.
This is a chair.
It's feminine, "une chaise".
This is a seat.
It's masculine, "un siège".
This is a shoe.
It's feminine, "une chaise".
This is a finger.
It's masculine, it's a finger.
But it gets even weirder because here is Canada.
It's masculine for some reason.
But here is Poland.
It's feminine for some reason.
Strength is feminine.
La force.
Love is masculine.
Un amour.
Oh la la.
When I say nearly everything, really I mean it.
So, gendering is not optional.
This is a key thing that you have to remember.
If you say "un tulip" inside a sentence and you are
not a beginner or a tourist, that means that we have not
switched to in the quirks mode, that we will do some
extra mile or, you know, extra kilometers, as we say, we will
offer to correct you, even verbally, because we will assume that you
made an error or we didn't understand you.
It's like a checksum or CRC.
So that's not the end of it.
Here is a big hat.
Un grand chapeau.
Here is a big tulip.
Une grande tulipe.
In French, we do an accord.
This.
That means that we do change the form of the adjectives
that comes with the noun.
By the way, I learned that it was called a co-ch
ord in English, but nobody says that, so we don't care.
Here are two tulips.
Actually, you do a code in English, but only for the noun.
And we do it, of course, in French.
Here is two big tulip.
Tulips.
So, of course, both gender and number are used in the circle.
And it also works with people.
And so, we talked a lot about gender of stuff.
Because, of course, gender of people also affects the language.
Here, an old man, un vieil homme, two old men.
Oh, did you notice?
You also do an accord with a weird thing.
It's not only about other languages.
Deux vieux hommes.
Two old women.
Deux vieilles femmes.
Now, that you have all of that in mind, let's take
a more complex example so you understand the problem that is coming.
Here is a detective.
In French, we can translate that to "un inspecteur".
And the gender is visible because it's "un inspecteur".
Because if it was a female detective, it would be "une inspect
rice".
As you can see, "une" changed, but also "inspectrice".
And that means...
Oh, by the way, we don't know the gender of the
user.
So, maybe you can deduce the problem that we can have
at some point.
But actually, it's not the actual problem that I'm talking
about right now.
But, of course, it also happens.
When you have two detectives, a duo of detectives, one
male detective and a female detective.
Together, we call them two detectives.
Which gender should we use in French for this group?
Well, you will have to use the masculine form.
Deux inspecteur.
I know.
But here's a team with five detectives and four of
them are female detectives.
How should we translate five detectives in that case?
Masculine again.
Cinq inspecteur.
This comes from an old rule we even learned in school, masculine.
Le masculin l'emporte.
The masculine takes it all.
As soon as there is one noun subject or part of a
group that is masculine, we should use the masculine group for the
whole group.
And let's be honest, this rule sucks.
People try to reason about it, saying that in French, masculine is
a neutral form.
It's a cop-out.
Always gendering in masculine...
in the masculine form, sorry.
The masculine form blocks some young women from projecting themselves to wall
domains, can make them feel non-represented.
And moreover, that's just unfair in a lot of ways.
So, at some point in the 21st century, some people got
fed up with that and tried to change things by using something
that they called écriture inclusive writing.
Basically, it's just voluntary using some word, piece of sentences, and
tricks to make sure that we stop excluding women from the language.
So, here are two main strategies that we can use to implement
écriture inclusive.
Either write both masculine and feminine forms every time, in whatever order,
by the way, or merge both forms into a same word like
this.
And to do that, you use some points médians, which are
basically interpreted, but nobody say that even in English, which are basically
dots that you place in the middle of the vertical height of
the line.
Of course, we could use parenthesis, but then you put 50
% of the population inside parenthesis.
And so, yeah, that's weird.
So, we tend not to do that.
Equiture inclusive as a linguistic innovation was fringed
at first, but as time goes by, it became more and more
common news, especially from companies and agencies, because it was easy and
efficient way to making clear that you wanted the situation improving, showing
that you cared about the subject of gender inclusivity.
But then, after a few years, I'd say five or six
years of widespread usage, some right-wing people started to ask themselves,
you know, this world-recriture inclusive thing, isn't this
work?
I mean, they focused a lot about those points médians form,
they call it something ugly, weird, decadent, or whatever, and
basically created an equal sign between using the point médian and
being woke.
It was bullshit, you know, but it's like that kind of
stuff.
It's not like this kind of stuff would stop them.
It's perfect scapegoat for them.
So, of course, they started coming to the Blue Sky repository, complaining
about using politically-sided language, just because we followed a somewhat common
new practice of caring about inclusivity.
So, from there, what should we do?
Well, actually, I thought about that before they even complained, and I
trained myself to mainly use a long way of doing écriture
inclusive by both writing the feminine and masculine forms.
And then, if and only if we have very little room for
the translated version, then at the last resort, using point médian
short form, and it's what we did for Abonnez,
by the way, the title example that I used.
But we have some trick up our sleeves to make it better.
And to be fair, I lied to you.
I'm sorry.
By omission.
I'd say.
What if there were words that shared the same form in both
tenders?
That's why I use detective as an example.
A detective can also be translated in French as "un detective" and
a female detective as "un detective".
Perfect!
Those words that can be written the same in both masculine and
feminine form are called "épicenne" words, and they're awesome
for us, because they basically solve the problem in a very nice
way.
However, they don't always exist.
There are not always synonyms that have this property of
being "épicenne", including "abonnez", by the way.
That's why I have to use that.
So to recap, going forward when I face this kind of puzzle
in my translation work, my policy is to try to find an "
épicenne" word, and if I can't find one, then
to use the expanded version with both masculine and feminine form, and
then, and only when space is missing as a last resort using
the point médian.
And here we have it.
And by the way, and this, as a conclusion for this part,
here is what Dan Abramoff, that at that time, part
of the Blue Sky team posted before closing that pull request that
wanted to revert the work that we did on gender-ne
utral language.
It was very validating to see part of the Blue Sky
team officially recognizing the work we did, the balance we tried to
find by not using the somewhat controversial to the far right, new
forms where we could, and more of the pragmatic approach I tried
to follow.
So thank you again, Dan and the Blue Sky team for our
support.
Builders, please support your translators if you are working with
your choices.
Okay, let's get to the fourth point, and we have some
short time to go on.
So it's going way easier now.
But not easier, but quicker to understand.
So this traduis l'angle d'origine anglais.
So a very quick, only one size, a short French 102 session.
I reassure you, it's very, very quick.
This is the cat.
It's the cat.
You would agree, I think.
It's beautiful.
And in French, we would say le chat.
And this is a tree.
It's such a beautiful tree.
It's the tree.
And we would say l'arbre, not le arbre.
Because le arbre would sound weird, we get rid of the
e and we replace it with a little apostrophe.
Elysion is not optional.
If you don't do it, we will get back to the
same, we'll crash in a way, and we'll ask you,
what did you just say?
Because we will assume that something went wrong.
It's like a checksum again.
So when we get back to translating software, for example, if you
have a message like "new message from Alexandre", in English, it
would be translated as "nouveau message d'Alexandre"
in French, and not "nouveau message d'Alexandre".
That wouldn't work.
We are used to software not doing the Elysion stuff.
Because it's hard to do it properly.
There are some letters that only triggers the Elysion in
some cases.
The Haspiré, if you know French.
And there are a lot of hard-coded exceptions in the
language too.
So yeah, we love exceptions in French.
So because of that, the internationalization library just don't care.
And there's no standard way of doing it, like we pull
over genders.
So yeah, it's perceived as too hard and standard.
So what can we do?
Well, if I take this actual example from the BlueSky
app to translate a string like translated from English, ideally, we would
write "traduit depuis l'anglais", but we can't because
it's hard to encode that in a translation system.
So we can't do "traduit depuis l'anglais" because
it will sound like that.
And we can't do "traduit depuis l'anglais" either.
So we have to do workarounds like "traduit orig
inelle en anglais", literally translated originally in English.
Or because "en" doesn't have this Elysion stuff.
So we don't care.
It works.
Actually, I didn't use that one, but an even clearer one,
because in that context, it could be a little bit, you know,
complex.
So I used "traduit langue originelle anglais", translated
source language English.
Fun fact from this morning.
It's an exclusive.
I wanted to make sure that I quoted my translation correctly.
And this morning, I tried to find it and quote it.
And no, there weren't any translation about that.
So I took my phone, got my one of my English shit
posts from a day ago.
It translates.
And yeah, in the meantime, Eric, the designer, one of the designers
of BlueSky changed actually all the whole design and this
string doesn't exist anymore.
There is a nice arrow that conveys the message even easier
over there.
So yeah, better.
Sometimes, you know, design can solve this kind of thing.
But honestly, I prefer this anyway.
So it's a good ending in my books.
Sometimes there are no perfect selection, only workaround.
This is the key thing that I want you to remember.
We try to do our best, but sometime, yeah, you know, we
can do what we can do.
Okay, my last point is about following, discover,
and for you, et cetera.
As you may, here is the UI in French.
So I will deem out all the user-generated content.
So you can think, you can see that nearly everything is translated
in French.
Nearly everything is translated in French.
Not those.
Why?
Well, because feed names are not part of our language catalog.
And you could say, oh, but feed names are user-generated.
Yeah, but you may have noticed that I said before, maybe not
if I wasn't following my notes, but it's not always
perceived as user-generated.
Because users don't always perceive those words as provided by users,
but part of the product.
So it's weird that they are not translated.
We can't translate those made ahead of time.
And we could use some acts to find and replace the most
popular one.
That's something that actually there is an open pull request from
server-dude 29 to do exactly that.
But it's not a very photoproof way of
fixing this problem, in my opinion.
So how should we proceed?
Well, I don't know.
No, honestly, I don't know.
Please, dear AT Protonerds, this is a mission I
give you, your homework.
Please figure this out.
We have to figure out a solution to do that.
Actually, we were able to do that with labels, moderation labels.
I've just learned that from Travis from Cartridge that explained
that to me yesterday.
But it wasn't good for a feed name.
It's so frustrating because they are the very prominent part of
the UI for good reasons.
It's a very good feature.
And yeah, it's very frustrated that it's not translatable
right now.
So here we have it.
Context is everything.
Support genders and translators.
Workarounds may be required.
User content should be translatable as soon as they are not
perceived as user content.
Is that it?
No, of course not.
It's not the end of it.
Translating stuff is only a small part of the equation.
You should think about localization holistically.
Because as an integrated experience, language and region-specific stuff are everywhere.
And again, we don't expect you to figure it out from
day one or to figure it out by yourself.
You can't know everything.
But I would say that every given will provide tremendous value to
users around the world.
We talked a lot about what could also be translated in the
previous panel.
But just to recap, terms and conditions are not translated right now
for Blue Sky.
Community guidelines are not translated right now for Blue Sky.
It's kind of weird in a way that we expect users
to respect rules they can't even read.
Training topics are not localized.
And one key message that I want to give you is we
don't care about the NFL.
Stop trying to tell us about the NFL.
We don't care.
It's just a weird thing.
You don't even use football correctly.
Weird.
And also blog posts and help pages are not translated right now.
Discover feed algorithms.
Nighthaven did a great leaflet about that.
Are not localized.
So you will encounter a lot of content that is not in
your language.
And you can.
There are some analyst systems that are in place that are not
very, that's a hack, not a proper localization.
And of course, announcements right now.
Blue Sky do not do announcements in any other language that's
Japanese and English.
And that's it.
That's weird.
But we talk a little bit about that in the previous panel.
And here we are.
Thank you for listening.
To see my work in action.
Thanks.
As a guy said at some point, please clap.
Do see my work in action.
You can just go to the settings and change the language to
French.
I also want to thank surfdude29 because this guy
simply is an informal translation manager for the blue sky open source
project.
He do it in his spare time.
And that's awesome that he do that.
And also thanks to people that helped me figure it out some
stuff on those slides.
And of course, a big shout out to all the other fellow
translators.
I hope that I didn't, you know, say anything weird about
your work too.
And as Stan Epperl said, the end is never the
end about all the things related to translation.
Do you have any questions?
Do we have time for questions?
Oh, there are no times.
Ah, sorry.
So yeah.
Yeah.
And feel free to follow me to know more about that.
Thanks.
Thank you so much, Stan.